CHAPTER XIII


     I will stand to and feed,
     Although my last.

                          --Tempest.

The savor of preparation which had been noticed by Captain Lawton began
to increase within the walls of the cottage; certain sweet-smelling
odors, that arose from the subterranean territories of Caesar, gave to
the trooper the most pleasing assurances that his olfactory nerves,
which on such occasions were as acute as his eyes on others, had
faithfully performed their duty; and for the benefit of enjoying the
passing sweets as they arose, the dragoon so placed himself at a window
of the building, that not a vapor charged with the spices of the East
could exhale on its passage to the clouds, without first giving its
incense to his nose. Lawton, however, by no means indulged himself in
this comfortable arrangement, without first making such preparations to
do meet honor to the feast, as his scanty wardrobe would allow. The
uniform of his corps was always a passport to the best tables, and this,
though somewhat tarnished by faithful service and unceremonious usage,
was properly brushed and decked out for the occasion. His head, which
nature had ornamented with the blackness of a crow, now shone with the
whiteness of snow; and his bony hand, that so well became the saber,
peered from beneath a ruffle with something like maiden coyness. The
improvements of the dragoon went no further, excepting that his boots
shone with more than holiday splendor, and his spurs glittered in the
rays of the sun, as became the pure ore of which they were composed.

Caesar moved through the apartments with a face charged with an
importance exceeding even that which had accompanied him in his
melancholy task of the morning. The black had early returned from the
errand on which he had been dispatched by the peddler, and, obedient to
the commands of his mistress, promptly appeared to give his services
where his allegiance was due; so serious, indeed, was his duty now
becoming, that it was only at odd moments he was enabled to impart to
his sable brother, who had been sent in attendance on Miss Singleton to
the Locusts, any portion of the wonderful incidents of the momentous
night he had so lately passed. By ingeniously using, however, such
occasions as accidentally offered, Caesar communicated so many of the
heads of his tale, as served to open the eyes of his visitor to their
fullest width. The gusto for the marvelous was innate in these sable
worthies; and Miss Peyton found it necessary to interpose her authority,
in order to postpone the residue of the history to a more befitting
opportunity.

"Ah! Miss Jinnett," said Caesar, shaking his head, and looking all that
he expressed, "'twas awful to see Johnny Birch walk on a feet when he
lie dead!"

This concluded the conversation; though the black promised himself the
satisfaction, and did not fail to enjoy it, of having many a gossip on
the subject at a future period.

The ghost thus happily laid, the department of Miss Peyton flourished;
and by the time the afternoon's sun had traveled a two hours' journey
from the meridian, the formal procession from the kitchen to the parlor
commenced, under the auspices of Caesar, who led the van, supporting a
turkey on the palms of his withered hands, with the dexterity of a
balance master.

Next followed the servant of Captain Lawton, bearing, as he marched
stiffly, and walking wide, as if allowing room for his steed, a ham of
true Virginian flavor; a present from the spinster's brother in Accomac.
The supporter of this savory dish kept his eye on his trust with
military precision; and by the time he reached his destination, it might
be difficult to say which contained the most juice, his own mouth or the
Accomac bacon.

Third in the line was to be seen the valet of Colonel Wellmere, who
carried in either hand chickens fricasseed and oyster patties.

After him marched the attendant of Dr. Sitgreaves, who had instinctively
seized an enormous tureen, as most resembling matters he understood, and
followed on in place, until the steams of the soup so completely
bedimmed the spectacles he wore, as a badge of office, that, on arriving
at the scene of action, he was compelled to deposit his freight on the
floor, until, by removing the glasses, he could see his way through the
piles of reserved china and plate warmers.

Next followed another trooper, whose duty it was to attend on Captain
Singleton; and, as if apportioning his appetite to the feeble state of
his master, he had contented himself with conveying a pair of ducks,
roasted, until their tempting fragrance began to make him repent his
having so lately demolished a breakfast that had been provided for his
master's sister, with another prepared for himself.

The white boy, who belonged to the house, brought up the rear, groaning
under a load of sundry dishes of vegetables, that the cook, by way of
climax, had unwittingly heaped on him.

But this was far from all of the preparations for that day's feast;
Caesar had no sooner deposited his bird, which, but the week before, had
been flying amongst the highlands of Dutchess, little dreaming of so
soon heading such a goodly assemblage, than he turned mechanically on
his heel, and took up his line of march again for the kitchen. In this
evolution the black was imitated by his companions in succession, and
another procession to the parlor followed in the same order. By this
admirable arrangement, whole flocks of pigeons, certain bevies of
quails, shoals of flatfish, bass, and sundry woodcock, found their way
into the presence of the company.

A third attack brought suitable quantities of potatoes, onions, beets,
coldslaw, rice, and all the other minutiae of a goodly dinner.

The board now fairly groaned with American profusion, and Caesar,
glancing his eye over the show with a most approving conscience, after
readjusting every dish that had not been placed on the table with his
own hands, proceeded to acquaint the mistress of the revels that his
task was happily accomplished.

Some half hour before the culinary array just recorded took place, all
the ladies disappeared, much in the same unaccountable manner that
swallows flee the approach of winter. But the springtime of their return
had arrived, and the whole party were collected in an apartment that, in
consequence of its containing no side table, and being furnished with a
chintz coverlet settee, was termed a withdrawing-room.

The kind-hearted spinster had deemed the occasion worthy, not only of
extraordinary preparations in the culinary department, but had seen
proper to deck her own person in garments suited to the guests whom it
was now her happiness to entertain.

On her head Miss Peyton wore a cap of exquisite lawn, which was
ornamented in front with a broad border of lace, that spread from the
face in such a manner as to admit of a display of artificial flowers,
clustered in a group on the summit of her fine forehead.

The color of her hair was lost in the profusion of powder with which it
was covered; but a slight curling of the extremities in some degree
relieved the formality of its arrangement, and gave a look of feminine
softness to the features.

Her dress was a rich, heavy silk, of violet color, cut low around the
bust, with a stomacher of the same material, that fitted close to the
figure, and exhibited the form, from the shoulders to the waist in its
true proportions. Below, the dress was full, and sufficiently showed
that parsimony in attire was not a foible of the day. A small loop
displayed the beauty of the fabric to advantage, and aided in giving
majesty to the figure.

The tall stature of the lady was heightened by shoes of the same
material with the dress, whose heels added more than an inch to the
liberality of nature.

The sleeves were short, and close to the limb, until they fell off at
the elbows in large ruffles, that hung in rich profusion from the arm
when extended; and duplicates and triplicates of lawn, trimmed with
Dresden lace, lent their aid in giving delicacy to a hand and arm that
yet retained their whiteness and symmetry. A treble row of large pearls
closely encircled her throat; and a handkerchief of lace partially
concealed that part of the person that the silk had left exposed, but
which the experience of forty years had warned Miss Peyton should now
be veiled.

Thus attired, and standing erect with the lofty grace that distinguished
the manners of that day, the maiden would have looked into nothingness a
bevy of modern belles.

The taste of Sarah had kept even pace with the decorations of her aunt;
and a dress, differing in no respect from the one just described, but
in material and tints, exhibited her imposing form to equal advantage.
The satin of her robe was of a pale bluish color. Twenty years did not,
however, require the screen that was prudent in forty, and nothing but
an envious border of exquisite lace hid, in some measure, what the satin
left exposed to view. The upper part of the bust, and the fine fall of
the shoulders, were blazing in all their native beauty, and, like the
aunt, the throat was ornamented by a treble row of pearls, to correspond
with which were rings of the same quality in the ears. The head was
without a cap, and the hair drawn up from the countenance so as to give
to the eye all the loveliness of a forehead as polished as marble and as
white as snow. A few straggling curls fell gracefully on the neck, and a
bouquet of artificial flowers was also placed, like a coronet, over
her brow.

Miss Singleton had resigned her brother to the advice of Dr. Sitgreaves,
who had succeeded in getting his patient into a deep sleep after
quieting certain feverish symptoms that followed the agitation of the
interview. The sister was persuaded, by the observant mistress of the
mansion, to make one of the party, and she sat by the side of Sarah,
differing but little in appearance from that lady, except in refusing
the use of powder on her raven locks, and that her unusually high
forehead and large, brilliant eyes gave an expression of thoughtfulness
to her features, that was possibly heightened by the paleness of
her cheek.

Last and least, but not the most unlovely, in this display of female
charms, was the youngest daughter of Mr. Wharton. Frances, we have
already mentioned, left the city before she had attained to the age of
fashionable womanhood. A few adventurous spirits were already beginning
to make inroads in those customs which had so long invaded the comforts
of the fair sex; and the youthful girl had ventured to trust her beauty
to the height which nature had bestowed. This was but little, but that
little was a masterpiece. Frances several times had determined, in the
course of the morning, to bestow more than usual pains in the decoration
of her person. Each time in succession, as she formed this resolution,
she spent a few minutes in looking earnestly towards the north, and then
she as invariably changed it.

At the appointed hour, our heroine appeared in the drawing-room, clothed
in a robe of pale blue silk, of a cut and fashion much like that worn by
her sister. Her hair was left to the wild curls of nature, its
exuberance being confined to the crown of her head by a long, low comb,
made of light tortoise shell; a color barely distinguishable in the
golden hue of her tresses. Her dress was without a plait or a wrinkle,
and fitted the form with an exactitude that might lead one to imagine
the arch girl more than suspected the beauties it displayed. A tucker of
rich Dresden lace softened the contour of the figure. Her head was
without ornament; but around her throat was a necklace of gold clasped
in front with a rich cornelian.

Once, and once only, as they moved towards the repast, did Lawton see a
foot thrust itself from beneath the folds of her robe, and exhibit its
little beauties encased in a slipper of blue silk, clasped close to the
shape by a buckle of brilliants. The trooper caught himself sighing as
he thought, though it was good for nothing in the stirrup, how
enchantingly it would grace a minuet.

As the black appeared on the threshold of the room, making a low
reverence, which has been interpreted for some centuries into "dinner
waits," Mr. Wharton, clad in a dress of drab, bedecked with enormous
buttons, advanced formally to Miss Singleton, and bending his powdered
head nearly to the level of the hand he extended, received hers
in return.

Dr. Sitgreaves offered the same homage to Miss Peyton, and met with
equal favor; the lady first pausing to draw on her gloves.

Colonel Wellmere was honored with a smile from Sarah, while performing a
similar duty; and Frances gave the ends of her taper fingers to Captain
Lawton with maiden bashfulness.

Much time, and some trouble were expended before the whole party were,
to the great joy of Caesar, comfortably arranged around the table, with
proper attention to all points of etiquette and precedence. The black
well knew the viands were not improving; and though abundantly able to
comprehend the disadvantage of eating a cold dinner, it greatly exceeded
his powers of philosophy to weigh all the latent consequences to society
which depend on social order.

For the first ten minutes all but the captain of dragoons found
themselves in a situation much to their liking. Even Lawton would have
been perfectly happy, had not excess of civility on the part of his host
and Miss Jeanette Peyton kept him from the more agreeable occupation of
tasting dishes he did want, in order to decline those he did not. At
length, however, the repast was fairly commenced, and a devoted
application to the viands was more eloquent than a thousand words in
favor of Dinah's skill.

Next came drinking with the ladies; but as the wine was excellent, and
the glasses ample, the trooper bore this interruption with consummate
good nature. Nay, so fearful was he of giving offense, and of omitting
any of the nicer points of punctilio, that having commenced this
courtesy with the lady who sat next him, he persevered until not one of
his fair companions could, with justice, reproach him with partiality in
this particular.

Long abstemiousness from anything like generous wine might plead the
excuse of Captain Lawton, especially when exposed to so strong a
temptation as that now before him. Mr. Wharton had been one of a set of
politicians in New York, whose principal exploits before the war had
been to assemble, and pass sage opinions on the signs of the times,
under the inspiration of certain liquor made from a grape that grew on
the south side of the island of Madeira, and which found its way into
the colonies of North America through the medium of the West Indies,
sojourning awhile in the Western Archipelago, by way of proving the
virtues of the climate. A large supply of this cordial had been drawn
from his storehouse in the city, and some of it now sparkled in a bottle
before the captain, blushing in the rays of the sun, which were passing
obliquely through it, like amber.

Though the meat and vegetables had made their entrance with perfect
order and propriety, their exeunt was effected much in the manner of a
retreat of militia. The point was to clear the board something after the
fabled practice of the harpies, and by dint of scrambling, tossing,
breaking, and spilling, the remnants of the overflowing repast
disappeared. And now another series of processions commenced, by virtue
of which a goodly display of pastry, with its usual accompaniments,
garnished the table.

Mr. Wharton poured out a glass of wine for the lady who sat on his right
hand, and, pushing the bottle to a guest, said with a low bow,--

"We are to be honored with a toast from Miss Singleton."

Although there was nothing more in this movement than occurred every day
on such occasions, yet the lady trembled, colored, and grew pale again,
seemingly endeavoring to rally her thoughts, until, by her agitation,
she had excited the interest of the whole party; when by an effort, and
in a manner as if she had striven in vain to think of another, Isabella
said, faintly,--

"Major Dunwoodie."

The health was drunk cheerfully by all but Colonel Wellmere, who wet his
lips, and drew figures on the table with some of the liquor he
had spilled.

At length Colonel Wellmere broke silence by saying aloud to Captain
Lawton,--

"I suppose, sir, this Mr. Dunwoodie will receive promotion in the rebel
army, for the advantage my misfortune gave him over my command."

The trooper had supplied the wants of nature to his perfect
satisfaction; and, perhaps, with the exception of Washington and his
immediate commander, there was no mortal whose displeasure he regarded a
tittle. First helping himself, therefore, to a little of his favorite
bottle, he replied with admirable coolness,--

"Colonel Wellmere, your pardon; Major Dunwoodie owes his allegiance to
the confederated states of North America, and where he owes it he pays
it. Such a man is no rebel. Promoted I hope he may be, both because he
deserves it, and because I am next in rank in the corps; and I know not
what you call a misfortune, unless you deem meeting the Virginia
horse as such."

"We will not differ about terms, sir," said the colonel, haughtily. "I
spoke as duty to my sovereign prompted; but do you not call the loss of
a commander a misfortune to a party?"

"It certainly may be so," said the trooper, with emphasis.

"Miss Peyton, will you favor us with a toast?" cried the master of the
house, anxious to stop this dialogue.

The lady bowed her head with dignity, as she named "General Montrose";
and the long-absent bloom stole lightly over her features.

"There is no term more doubtful than that word misfortune," said the
surgeon, regardless of the nice maneuvers of the host. "Some deem one
thing a misfortune, others its opposite; misfortune begets misfortune.
Life is a misfortune, for it may be the means of enduring misfortune;
and death is a misfortune, as it abridges the enjoyments of life."

"It is a misfortune that our mess has no such wine as this," interrupted
the trooper.

"We will pledge you a sentiment in it, sir, as it seems to suit your
taste," said Mr. Wharton.

Lawton filled to the brim, and drank, "A speedy peace, or a stirring
war."

"I drink your toast, Captain Lawton, though I greatly distrust your
construction of activity," said the surgeon. "In my poor judgment,
cavalry should be kept in the rear to improve a victory, and not sent in
front to gain it. Such may be said to be their natural occupation, if
the term can be used in reference to so artificial a body; for all
history shows that the horse have done most when held in reserve."

This dissertation, uttered in a sufficiently didactic manner, was a hint
that Miss Peyton did not neglect. She arose and retired, followed by
her juniors.

Nearly at the same moment, Mr. Wharton and his son made an apology for
their absence, which was required on account of the death of a near
neighbor, and withdrew.

The retreat of the ladies was the signal for the appearance of the
surgeon's cigar, which, being established in a corner of his mouth, in a
certain knowing way, caused not the slightest interruption to his
discourse.

"If anything can sweeten captivity and wounds, it must be the happiness
of suffering in the society of the ladies who have left us," gallantly
observed the colonel, as he resumed his seat after closing the door.

"Sympathy and kindness have their influence on the human system,"
returned the surgeon, knocking the ashes from his cigar, with the tip of
a little finger, in the manner of an adept. "The connection is intimate
between the moral and physical feelings; but still, to accomplish a
cure, and restore nature to the healthy tone it has lost from disease or
accident, requires more than can flow from unguided sympathies. In such
cases, the lights--" the surgeon accidentally caught the eye of the
trooper and he paused. Taking two or three hasty puffs, he essayed to
finish the sentence, "In such cases, the knowledge that flows from
the lights--"

"You were saying, sir," said Colonel Wellmere, sipping his wine,--

"The purport of my remark went to say," continued Sitgreaves, turning
his back on Lawton, "that a bread poultice would not set a broken arm."

"More is the pity," cried the trooper, "for next to eating, the
nourishment could not be more innocently applied."

"To you, Colonel Wellmere," said the surgeon, "as a man of education, I
can with safety appeal." The colonel bowed. "You must have observed the
dreadful havoc made in your ranks by the men who were led by this
gentleman"; the colonel looked grave, again; "how, when blows lighted on
their frames, life was invariably extinguished, beyond all hope of
scientific reparation; how certain yawning wounds were inflicted, that
must set at defiance the art of the most experienced practitioner; now,
sir, to you I triumphantly appeal, therefore, to know whether your
detachment would not have been as effectually defeated, if the men had
all lost a right arm, for instance, as if they had all lost
their heads."

"The triumph of your appeal is somewhat hasty, sir," said Wellmere.

"Is the cause of liberty advanced a step by such injudicious harshness
in the field?" continued the surgeon, bent on the favorite principle
of his life.

"I am yet to learn that the cause of liberty is in any manner advanced
by the services of any gentleman in the rebel army," rejoined
the colonel.

"Not liberty! Good God, for what then are we contending?"

"Slavery, sir; yes, even slavery; you are putting the tyranny of a mob
on the throne of a kind and lenient prince. Where is the consistency of
your boasted liberty?"

"Consistency!" repeated the surgeon, looking about him a little wildly,
at hearing such sweeping charges against a cause he had so long
thought holy.

"Aye, sir, your consistency. Your congress of sages have published a
manifesto, wherein they set forth the equality of political rights."

"'Tis true, and it is done most ably."

"I say nothing of its ability; but if true, why not set your slaves at
liberty?" This argument, which is thought by most of the colonel's
countrymen a triumphant answer to a thousand eloquent facts, lost none
of its weight by the manner in which it was uttered.

Every American feels humbled at the necessity of vindicating his country
from the apparent inconsistency and injustice of the laws alluded to.
His feelings are much like those of an honorable man who is compelled to
exonerate himself from a disgraceful charge, although he may know the
accusation to be false. At the bottom, Sitgreaves had much good sense,
and thus called on, he took up the cudgels of argument in
downright earnest.

"We deem it a liberty to have the deciding voice in the councils by
which we are governed. We think it a hardship to be ruled by the king of
a people who live at a distance of three thousand miles, and who cannot,
and who do not, feel a single political interest in common with
ourselves. I say nothing of oppression; the child was of age, and was
entitled to the privileges of majority. In such cases, there is but one
tribunal to which to appeal for a nation's rights--it is power, and we
now make the appeal."

"Such doctrines may suit your present purposes," said Wellmere, with a
sneer; "but I apprehend it is opposed to all the opinions and practices
of civilized nations."

"It is in conformity with the practices of all nations," said the
surgeon, returning the nod and smile of Lawton, who enjoyed the good
sense of his comrade as much as he disliked what he called "his medical
talk." "Who would be ruled when he can rule? The only rational ground to
take is, that every community has a right to govern itself, so that in
no manner it violates the laws of God."

"And is holding your fellow creatures in bondage in conformity to those
laws?" asked the colonel, impressively.

The surgeon took another glass, and hemming once, returned to the
combat.

"Sir," said he, "slavery is of very ancient origin, and it seems to have
been confined to no particular religion or form of government; every
nation of civilized Europe does, or has held their fellow creatures in
this kind of _duresse_."

"You will except Great Britain," cried the colonel, proudly.

"No, sir," continued the surgeon, confidently, feeling that he was now
carrying the war out of his own country, "I cannot except Great Britain.
It was her children, her ships, and her laws, that first introduced the
practice into these states; and on her institutions the judgment must
fall. There is not a foot of ground belonging to England, in which a
negro would be useful, that has not its slave. England herself has none,
but England is overflowing with physical force, a part of which she is
obliged to maintain in the shape of paupers. The same is true of France,
and most other European countries. So long as we were content to remain
colonies, nothing was said of our system of domestic slavery; but now,
when we are resolute to obtain as much freedom as the vicious system of
metropolitan rule has left us, that which is England's gift has become
our reproach. Will your master liberate the slaves of his subjects
should he succeed in subduing the new states, or will he condemn the
whites to the same servitude as that in which he has been so long
content to see the blacks? It is true, we continue the practice; but we
must come gradually to the remedy, or create an evil greater than that
which we endure at present. Doubtless, as we advance, the manumission of
our slaves will accompany us, until happily these fair regions shall
exist, without a single image of the Creator that is held in a state
which disqualifies him to judge of that Creator's goodness."

It will be remembered that Doctor Sitgreaves spoke forty years ago, and
Wellmere was unable to contradict his prophetic assertion.

Finding the subject getting to be knotty, the Englishman retired to the
apartment in which the ladies had assembled; and, seated by the side of
Sarah, he found a more pleasing employment in relating the events of
fashionable life in the metropolis, and in recalling the thousand little
anecdotes of their former associates. Miss Peyton was a pleased
listener, as she dispensed the bounties of the tea table, and Sarah
frequently bowed her blushing countenance to her needlework, as her face
glowed at the flattering remarks of her companion.

The dialogue we have related established a perfect truce between the
surgeon and his comrade; and the former having paid a visit to
Singleton, they took their leave of the ladies, and mounted; the former
to visit the wounded at the encampment, and the latter to rejoin his
troop. But their movements were arrested at the gate by an occurrence
that we shall relate in the next chapter.




