CHAPTER XXVIII


    The owlet loves the gloom of night,
        The lark salutes the day,
    The timid dove will coo at hand--
        But falcons soar away.
                                  --_Song in Duo_.

In a country settled, like these states, by a people who fled their
native land and much-loved firesides, victims of consciences and
religious zeal, none of the decencies and solemnities of a Christian
death are dispensed with, when circumstances will admit of their
exercise. The good woman of the house was a strict adherent to the forms
of the church to which she belonged; and having herself been awakened to
a sense of her depravity, by the ministry of the divine who harangued
the people of the adjoining parish, she thought it was from his
exhortations only that salvation could be meted out to the short-lived
hopes of Henry Wharton. Not that the kind-hearted matron was so ignorant
of the doctrines of the religion which she professed, as to depend,
theoretically, on mortal aid for protection; but she had, to use her own
phrase, "sat so long under the preaching of good Mr.----," that she had
unconsciously imbibed a practical reliance on his assistance, for that
which her faith should have taught her could come from the Deity alone.
With her, the consideration of death was at all times awful, and the
instant that the sentence of the prisoner was promulgated, she
dispatched Caesar, mounted on one of her husband's best horses, in quest
of her clerical monitor. This step had been taken without consulting
either Henry or his friends; and it was only when the services of Caesar
were required on some domestic emergency, that she explained the nature
of his absence. The youth heard her, at first, with an unconquerable
reluctance to admit of such a spiritual guide; but as our view of the
things of this life becomes less vivid, our prejudices and habits cease
to retain their influence; and a civil bow of thanks was finally given,
in requital for the considerate care of the well-meaning woman.

The black returned early from his expedition, and, as well as could be
gathered from his somewhat incoherent narrative, a minister of God might
be expected to arrive in the course of the day. The interruption that we
mentioned in our preceding chapter was occasioned by the entrance of the
landlady. At the intercession of Dunwoodie, orders had been given to the
sentinel who guarded the door of Henry's room, that the members of the
prisoner's family should, at all times, have free access to his
apartment. Caesar was included in this arrangement, as a matter of
convenience, by the officer in command; but strict inquiry and
examination was made into the errand of every other applicant for
admission. The major had, however, included himself among the relatives
of the British officer; and one pledge, that no rescue should be
attempted, was given in his name, for them all. A short conversation was
passing between the woman of the house and the corporal of the guard,
before the door that the sentinel had already opened in anticipation of
the decision of his noncommissioned commandant.

"Would you refuse the consolations of religion to a fellow creature
about to suffer death?" said the matron, with earnest zeal. "Would you
plunge a soul into the fiery furnace, and a minister at hand to point
out the straight and narrow path?"

"I'll tell you what, good woman," returned the corporal, gently pushing
her away; "I've no notion of my back being a highway for any man to walk
to heaven upon. A pretty figure I should make at the pickets, for
disobeying orders. Just step down and ask Lieutenant Mason, and you may
bring in a whole congregation. We have not taken the guard from the foot
soldiers, but an hour, and I shouldn't like to have it said that we know
less than the militia."

"Admit the woman," said Dunwoodie, sternly, observing, for the first
time, that one of his own corps was on post.

The corporal raised his hand to his cap, and fell back in silence; the
soldier stood to his arms, and the matron entered.

"Here is a reverend gentleman below, come to soothe the parting soul, in
the place of our own divine, who is engaged with an appointment that
could not be put aside; 'tis to bury old Mr.---"

"Show him in at once," said Henry, with feverish impatience.

"But will the sentinel let him pass? I would not wish a friend of
Mr.--to be rudely stopped on the threshold, and he a stranger."

All eyes were now turned on Dunwoodie, who, looking at his watch, spoke
a few words with Henry, in an undertone, and hastened from the
apartment, followed by Frances. The subject of their conversation was a
wish expressed by the prisoner for a clergyman of his own persuasion,
and a promise from the major, that one should be sent from Fishkill
town, through which he was about to pass, on his way to the ferry to
intercept the expected return of Harper. Mason soon made his bow at the
door, and willingly complied with the wishes of the landlady; and the
divine was invited to make his appearance accordingly.

The person who was ushered into the apartment, preceded by Caesar, and
followed by the matron, was a man beyond the middle age, or who might
rather be said to approach the downhill of life. In stature he was above
the size of ordinary men, though his excessive leanness might
contribute in deceiving as to his height; his countenance was sharp and
unbending, and every muscle seemed set in rigid compression. No joy or
relaxation appeared ever to have dwelt on features that frowned
habitually, as if in detestation of the vices of mankind. The brows were
beetling, dark, and forbidding, giving the promise of eyes of no less
repelling expression; but the organs were concealed beneath a pair of
enormous green goggles, through which they glared around with a
fierceness that denounced the coming day of wrath. All was fanaticism,
uncharitableness, and denunciation. Long, lank hair, a mixture of gray
and black, fell down his neck, and in some degree obscured the sides of
his face, and, parting on his forehead, fell in either direction in
straight and formal screens. On the top of this ungraceful exhibition
was laid impending forward, so as to overhang in some measure the whole
fabric, a large hat of three equal cocks. His coat was of a rusty black,
and his breeches and stockings were of the same color; his shoes without
luster, and half-concealed beneath huge plated buckles. He stalked into
the room, and giving a stiff nod with his head, took the chair offered
him by the black, in dignified silence. For several minutes no one broke
this ominous pause in the conversation; Henry feeling a repugnance to
his guest, that he was vainly endeavoring to conquer, and the stranger
himself drawing forth occasional sighs and groans, that threatened a
dissolution of the unequal connection between his sublimated soul and
its ungainly tenement. During this, deathlike preparation, Mr. Wharton,
with a feeling nearly allied to that of his son, led Sarah from the
apartment. His retreat was noticed by the divine, in a kind of scornful
disdain, who began to hum the air of a popular psalm tune, giving it the
full richness of the twang that distinguishes the Eastern [Footnote: By
"Eastern" is meant the states of New England, which, being originally
settled by Puritans, still retain many distinct shades of
character.] psalmody.

"Caesar," said Miss Peyton, "hand the gentleman some refreshment; he
must need it after his ride."

"My strength is not in the things of this life," said the divine,
speaking in a hollow, sepulchral voice. "Thrice have I this day held
forth in my Master's service, and fainted not; still it is prudent to
help this frail tenement of clay, for, surely, 'the laborer is worthy of
his hire.'"

Opening a pair of enormous jaws, he took a good measure of the proffered
brandy, and suffered it to glide downwards, with that sort of facility
with which man is prone to sin.

"I apprehend, then, sir, that fatigue will disable you from performing
the duties which kindness has induced you to attempt."

"Woman!" exclaimed the stranger, with energy, "when was I ever known to
shrink from a duty? But 'judge not lest ye be judged,' and fancy not
that it is given to mortal eyes to fathom the intentions of the Deity."

"Nay," returned the maiden, meekly, and slightly disgusted with his
jargon, "I pretend not to judge of either events, or the intentions of
my fellow creatures, much less of those of Omnipotence."

"'Tis well, woman,--'tis well," cried the minister, moving his head with
supercilious disdain; "humility becometh thy sex and lost condition; thy
weakness driveth thee on headlong like 'unto the bosom of destruction.'"

Surprised at this extraordinary deportment, but yielding to that habit
which urges us to speak reverently on sacred subjects, even when perhaps
we had better continue silent, Miss Peyton replied,--

"There is a Power above, that can and will sustain us all in well-doing,
if we seek its support in humility and truth."

The stranger turned a lowering look at the speaker, and then composing
himself into an air of self-abasement, he continued in the same
repelling tones,--

"It is not everyone that crieth out for mercy, that will be heard. The
ways of Providence are not to be judged by men--'Many are called, but
few chosen.' It is easier to talk of humility than to feel it. Are you
so humble, vile worm, as to wish to glorify God by your own damnation?
If not, away with you for a publican and a Pharisee!"

Such gross fanaticism was uncommon in America, and Miss Peyton began to
imbibe the impression that her guest was deranged; but remembering that
he had been sent by a well-known divine, and one of reputation, she
discarded the idea, and, with some forbearance, observed,--

"I may deceive myself, in believing that mercy is proffered to all, but
it is so soothing a doctrine, that I would not willingly be undeceived."

"Mercy is only for the elect," cried the stranger, with an unaccountable
energy; "and you are in the 'valley of the shadow of death.' Are you not
a follower of idle ceremonies, which belong to the vain church that our
tyrants would gladly establish here, along with their stamp acts and tea
laws? Answer me that, woman; and remember, that Heaven hears your
answer; are you not of that idolatrous communion?"

"I worship at the altars of my fathers," said Miss Peyton, motioning to
Henry for silence; "but bow to no other idol than my own infirmities."

"Yes, yes, I know ye, self-righteous and papal as ye are--followers of
forms, and listeners to bookish preaching; think you, woman, that holy
Paul had notes in his hand to propound the Word to the believers?"

"My presence disturbs you," said Miss Peyton, rising. "I will leave you
with my nephew, and offer those prayers in private that I did wish to
mingle with his."

So saying, she withdrew, followed by the landlady, who was not a little
shocked, and somewhat surprised, by the intemperate zeal of her new
acquaintance; for, although the good woman believed that Miss Peyton and
her whole church were on the highroad to destruction, she was by no
means accustomed to hear such offensive and open avowals of their fate.

Henry had with difficulty repressed the indignation excited by this
unprovoked attack on his meek and unresisting aunt; but as the door
closed on her retiring figure, he gave way to his feelings.

"I must confess, sir," he exclaimed with heat, "that in receiving a
minister of God, I thought I was admitting a Christian; and one who, by
feeling his own weaknesses, knew how to pity the frailties of others.
You have wounded the meek spirit of an excellent woman, and I
acknowledge but little inclination to mingle in prayer with so
intolerant a spirit."

The minister stood erect, with grave composure, following with his eyes,
in a kind of scornful pity, the retiring females, and suffered the
expostulation of the youth to be given, as if unworthy of his notice. A
third voice, however, spoke,--

"Such a denunciation would have driven many women into fits; but it has
answered the purpose well enough, as it is."

"Who's that?" cried the prisoner, in amazement, gazing around the room
in quest of the speaker.

"It is I, Captain Wharton," said Harvey Birch, removing the spectacles,
and exhibiting his piercing eyes, shining under a pair of
false eyebrows.

"Good heavens--Harvey!"

"Silence!" said the peddler, solemnly. "'Tis a name not to be mentioned,
and least of all here, within the heart of the American army." Birch
paused and gazed around him for a moment, with an emotion exceeding the
base passion of fear, and then continued in a gloomy tone, "There are a
thousand halters in that very name, and little hope would there be left
me of another escape, should I be again taken. This is a fearful venture
that I am making; but I could not sleep in quiet, and know that an
innocent man was about to die the death of a dog, when I might
save him."

"No," said Henry, with a glow of generous feeling on his cheek, "if the
risk to yourself be so heavy, retire as you came, and leave me to my
fate. Dunwoodie is making, even now, powerful exertions in my behalf;
and if he meets with Mr. Harper in the course of the night, my
liberation is certain."

"Harper!" echoed the peddler, remaining with his hands raised, in the
act of replacing the spectacles. "What do you know of Harper? And why do
you think he will do you service?"

"I have his promise; you remember our recent meeting in my father's
dwelling, and he then gave an unasked promise to assist me."

"Yes--but do you know him? That is--why do you think he has the power?
Or what reason have you for believing he will remember his word?"

"If there ever was the stamp of truth, or simple, honest benevolence, in
the countenance of man, it shone in his," said Henry. "Besides,
Dunwoodie has powerful friends in the rebel army, and it would be better
that I take the chance where I am, than thus to expose you to certain
death, if detected."

"Captain Wharton," said Birch, looking guardedly around and speaking
with impressive seriousness of manner, "if I fail you, all fail you. No
Harper nor Dunwoodie can save your life; unless you get out with me, and
that within the hour, you die to-morrow on the gallows of a murderer.
Yes, such are their laws; the man who fights, and kills, and plunders,
is honored; but he who serves his country as a spy, no matter how
faithfully, no matter how honestly, lives to be reviled, or dies like
the vilest criminal!"

"You forget, Mr. Birch," said the youth, a little indignantly, "that I
am not a treacherous, lurking spy, who deceives to betray; but innocent
of the charge imputed to me."

The blood rushed over the pale, meager features of the peddler, until
his face was one glow of fire; but it passed quickly away, as he
replied,--

"I have told you truth. Caesar met me, as he was going on his errand
this morning, and with him I have laid the plan which, if executed as I
wish, will save you--otherwise you are lost; and I again tell you, that
no other power on earth, not even Washington, can save you."

"I submit," said the prisoner, yielding to his earnest manner, and
goaded by the fears that were thus awakened anew.

The peddler beckoned him to be silent, and walking to the door, opened
it, with the stiff, formal air with which he had entered the apartment.

"Friend, let no one enter," he said to the sentinel. "We are about to go
to prayer, and would wish to be alone."

"I don't know that any will wish to interrupt you," returned the
soldier, with a waggish leer of his eye; "but, should they be so
disposed, I have no power to stop them, if they be of the prisoner's
friends. I have my orders, and must mind them, whether the Englishman
goes to heaven, or not."

"Audacious sinner!" said the pretended priest, "have you not the fear of
God before your eyes? I tell you, as you will dread punishment at the
last day, to let none of the idolatrous communion enter, to mingle in
the prayers of the righteous."

"Whew-ew-ew--what a noble commander you'd make for Sergeant Hollister!
You'd preach him dumb in a roll call. Harkee, I'll thank you not to make
such a noise when you hold forth, as to drown our bugles, or you may get
a poor fellow a short horn at his grog, for not turning out to the
evening parade. If you want to be alone, have you no knife to stick over
the door latch, that you must have a troop of horse to guard your
meetinghouse?"

The peddler took the hint, and closed the door immediately, using the
precaution suggested by the dragoon.

"You overact your part," said young Wharton, in constant apprehension of
discovery; "your zeal is too intemperate."

"For a foot soldier and them Eastern militia, it might be," said
Harvey, turning a bag upside down, that Caesar now handed him; "but
these dragoons are fellows that you must brag down. A faint heart,
Captain Wharton, would do but little here; but come, here is a black
shroud for your good-looking countenance," taking, at the same time, a
parchment mask, and fitting it to the face of Henry. "The master and the
man must change places for a season."

"I don't t'ink he look a bit like me," said Caesar, with disgust, as he
surveyed his young master with his new complexion.

"Stop a minute, Caesar," said the peddler, with the lurking drollery
that at times formed part of his manner, "till we get on the wool."

"He worse than ebber now," cried the discontented African. "A t'ink
colored man like a sheep! I nebber see sich a lip, Harvey; he most as
big as a sausage!"

Great pains had been taken in forming the different articles used in the
disguise of Captain Wharton, and when arranged, under the skillful
superintendence of the peddler, they formed together a transformation
that would easily escape detection, from any but an extraordinary
observer.

The mask was stuffed and shaped in such a manner as to preserve the
peculiarities, as well as the color, of the African visage; and the wig
was so artfully formed of black and white wool, as to imitate the
pepper-and-salt color of Caesar's own head, and to exact plaudits from
the black himself, who thought it an excellent counterfeit in everything
but quality.

"There is but one man in the American army who could detect you, Captain
Wharton," said the peddler, surveying his work with satisfaction, "and
he is just now out of our way."

"And who is he?"

"The man who made you prisoner. He would see your white skin through a
plank. But strip, both of you; your clothes must be exchanged from
head to foot."

Caesar, who had received minute instructions from the peddler in their
morning interview, immediately commenced throwing aside his coarse
garments, which the youth took up and prepared to invest himself with;
unable, however, to repress a few signs of loathing.

In the manner of the peddler there was an odd mixture of care and humor;
the former was the result of a perfect knowledge of their danger, and
the means necessary to be used in avoiding it; and the latter proceeded
from the unavoidably ludicrous circumstances before him, acting on an
indifference which sprang from habit, and long familiarity with such
scenes as the present.

"Here, captain," he said, taking up some loose wool, and beginning to
stuff the stockings of Caesar, which were already on the leg of the
prisoner; "some judgment is necessary in shaping this limb. You will
have to display it on horseback; and the Southern dragoons are so used
to the brittle-shins, that should they notice your well-turned calf,
they'd know at once it never belonged to a black."

"Golly!" said Caesar, with a chuckle, that exhibited a mouth open from
ear to ear, "Massa Harry breeches fit."

"Anything but your leg," said the peddler, coolly pursuing the toilet of
Henry. "Slip on the coat, captain, over all. Upon my word, you'd pass
well at a pinkster frolic; and here, Caesar, place this powdered wig
over your curls, and be careful and look out of the window, whenever the
door is open, and on no account speak, or you will betray all."

"I s'pose Harvey t'ink a colored man ain't got a tongue like oder folk,"
grumbled the black, as he took the station assigned to him.

Everything now was arranged for action, and the peddler very
deliberately went over the whole of his injunctions to the two actors in
the scene. The captain he conjured to dispense with his erect military
carriage, and for a season to adopt the humble paces of his father's
negro; and Caesar he enjoined to silence and disguise, so long as he
could possibly maintain them. Thus prepared, he opened the door, and
called aloud to the sentinel, who had retired to the farthest end of the
passage, in order to avoid receiving any of that spiritual comfort,
which he felt was the sole property of another.

"Let the woman of the house be called," said Harvey, in the solemn key
of his assumed character; "and let her come alone. The prisoner is in a
happy train of meditation, and must not be led from his devotions."

Caesar sank his face between his hands; and when the soldier looked into
the apartment, he thought he saw his charge in deep abstraction. Casting
a glance of huge contempt at the divine, he called aloud for the good
woman of the house. She hastened at the summons, with earnest zeal,
entertaining a secret hope that she was to be admitted to the gossip of
a death-bed repentance.

"Sister," said the minister, in the authoritative tones of a master,
"have you in the house `The Christian Criminal's last Moments, or
Thoughts on Eternity, for them who die a violent Death'?"

"I never heard of the book!" said the matron in astonishment.

"'Tis not unlikely; there are many books you have never heard of: it is
impossible for this poor penitent to pass in peace, without the
consolations of that volume. One hour's reading in it is worth an age of
man's preaching."

"Bless me, what a treasure to possess! When was it put out?"

"It was first put out at Geneva in the Greek language, and then
translated at Boston. It is a book, woman, that should be in the hands
of every Christian, especially such as die upon the gallows. Have a
horse prepared instantly for this black, who shall accompany me to my
brother--, and I will send down the volume yet in season. Brother,
compose thy mind; you are now in the narrow path to glory."

Caesar wriggled a little in his chair, but he had sufficient
recollection to conceal his face with hands that were, in their turn,
concealed by gloves. The landlady departed, to comply with this very
reasonable request, and the group of conspirators were again left to
themselves.

"This is well," said the peddler; "but the difficult task is to deceive
the officer who commands the guard--he is lieutenant to Lawton, and has
learned some of the captain's own cunning in these things. Remember,
Captain Wharton," continued he with an air of pride, "that now is the
moment when everything depends on our coolness."

"My fate can be made but little worse than it is at present, my worthy
fellow," said Henry; "but for your sake I will do all that in me lies."

"And wherein can I be more forlorn and persecuted than I now am?" asked
the peddler, with that wild incoherence which often crossed his manner.
"But I have promised _one_ to save you, and to him I have never yet
broken my word."

"And who is he?" said Henry, with awakened interest.

"No one."

The man soon returned, and announced that the horses were at the door.
Harvey gave the captain a glance, and led the way down the stairs, first
desiring the woman to leave the prisoner to himself, in order that he
might digest the wholesome mental food that he had so lately received.

A rumor of the odd character of the priest had spread from the sentinel
at the door to his comrades; so that when Harvey and Wharton reached the
open space before the building, they found a dozen idle dragoons
loitering about with the waggish intention of quizzing the fanatic, and
employed in affected admiration of the steeds.

"A fine horse!" said the leader in this plan of mischief; "but a little
low in flesh. I suppose from hard labor in your calling."

"My calling may be laborsome to both myself and this faithful beast, but
then a day of settling is at hand, that will reward me for all my
outgoings and incomings," said Birch, putting his foot in the stirrup,
and preparing to mount.

"You work for pay, then, as we fight for't?" cried another of the party.

"Even so--is not the laborer worthy of his hire?"

"Come, suppose you give us a little preaching; we have a leisure moment
just now, and there's no telling how much good you might do a set of
reprobates like us, in a few words. Here, mount this horseblock, and
take your text where you please."

The men now gathered in eager delight around the peddler, who, glancing
his eye expressively towards the captain, who had been suffered to
mount, replied,--

"Doubtless, for such is my duty. But, Caesar, you can ride up the road
and deliver the note--the unhappy prisoner will be wanting the book, for
his hours are numbered."

"Aye, aye, go along, Caesar, and get the book," shouted half a dozen
voices, all crowding eagerly around the ideal priest, in anticipation
of a frolic.

The peddler inwardly dreaded, that, in their unceremonious handling of
himself and garments, his hat and wig might be displaced, when detection
would be certain; he was therefore fain to comply with their request.
Ascending the horseblock, after hemming once or twice, and casting
several glances at the captain, who continued immovable, he commenced as
follows:--

"I shall call your attention, my brethren, to that portion of Scripture
which you will find in the second book of Samuel, and which is written
in the following words:--'_And the king lamented over Abner, and said.
Died Abner as a fool dieth? Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put
into fetters: as a man falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou. And
all the people wept again over him_.' Caesar, ride forward, I say, and
obtain the book as directed; thy master is groaning in spirit even now
for the want of it."

"An excellent text!" cried the dragoons. "Go on--go on--let the
snowball stay; he wants to be edified as well as another."

"What are you at there, scoundrels?" cried Lieutenant Mason, as he came
in sight from a walk he had taken to sneer at the evening parade of the
regiment of militia. "Away with every man of you to your quarters, and
let me find that each horse is cleaned and littered, when I come round."
The sound of the officer's voice operated like a charm, and no priest
could desire a more silent congregation, although he might possibly have
wished for one that was more numerous. Mason had not done speaking, when
it was reduced to the image of Caesar only. The peddler took that
opportunity to mount, but he had to preserve the gravity of his
movements, for the remark of the troopers upon the condition of their
beasts was but too just, and a dozen dragoon horses stood saddled and
bridled at hand, ready to receive their riders at a moment's warning.

"Well, have you bitted the poor fellow within," said Mason, "that he can
take his last ride under the curb of divinity, old gentleman?"

"There is evil in thy conversation, profane man," cried the priest,
raising his hands and casting his eyes upwards in holy horror; "so I
will depart from thee unhurt, as Daniel was liberated from the
lions' den."

"Off with you, for a hypocritical, psalm-singing, canting rogue in
disguise," said Mason scornfully. "By the life of Washington! it worries
an honest fellow to see such voracious beasts of prey ravaging a country
for which he sheds his blood. If I had you on a Virginia plantation for
a quarter of an hour, I'd teach you to worm the tobacco with
the turkeys."

"I leave you, and shake the dust off my shoes, that no remnant of this
wicked hole may tarnish the vestments of the godly."

"Start, or I will shake the dust from your jacket, designing knave! A
fellow to be preaching to my men! There's Hollister put the devil in
them by his exhorting; the rascals were getting too conscientious to
strike a blow that would raze the skin. But hold! Whither do you travel,
Master Blackey, in such godly company?"

"He goes," said the minister, hastily speaking for his companion, "to
return with a book of much condolence and virtue to the sinful youth
above, whose soul will speedily become white, even as his outwards are
black and unseemly. Would you deprive a dying man of the consolation of
religion?"

"No, no, poor fellow, his fate is bad enough; a famous good breakfast
his prim body of an aunt gave us. But harkee, Mr. Revelation, if the
youth must die _secundum arlem_, let it be under a gentleman's
directions, and my advice is, that you never trust that skeleton of
yours among us again, or I will take the skin off and leave you naked."

"Out upon thee for a reviler and scoffer of goodness!" said Birch,
moving slowly, and with a due observance of clerical dignity, down the
road, followed by the imaginary Caesar. "But I leave thee, and that
behind me that will prove thy condemnation, and take from thee a hearty
and joyful deliverance."

"Damn him," muttered the trooper. "The fellow rides like a stake, and
his legs stick out like the cocks of his hat. I wish I had him below
these hills, where the law is not over-particular, I'd---"

"Corporal of the guard!--corporal of the guard!" shouted the sentinel in
the passage to the chambers, "corporal of the guard!--corporal of
the guard!"

The subaltern flew up the narrow stairway that led to the room of the
prisoner, and demanded the meaning of the outcry.

The soldier was standing at the open door of the apartment, looking in
with a suspicious eye on the supposed British officer. On observing his
lieutenant, he fell back with habitual respect, and replied, with an air
of puzzled thought,--

"I don't know, sir; but just now the prisoner looked queer. Ever since
the preacher has left him, he don't look as he used to do--but," gazing
intently over the shoulder of his officer, "it must be him, too! There
is the same powdered head, and the darn in the coat, where he was hit
the day we had the last brush with the enemy."

"And then all this noise is occasioned by your doubting whether that
poor gentleman is your prisoner, or not, is it, sirrah? Who the devil do
you think it can be, else?"

"I don't know who else it can be," returned the fellow, sullenly; "but
he has grown thicker and shorter, if it is he; and see for yourself,
sir, he shakes all over, like a man in an ague."

This was but too true. Caesar was an alarmed auditor of this short
conversation, and, from congratulating himself upon the dexterous escape
of his young master, his thoughts were very naturally beginning to dwell
upon the probable consequences to his own person. The pause that
succeeded the last remark of the sentinel, in no degree contributed to
the restoration of his faculties. Lieutenant Mason was busied in
examining with his own eyes the suspected person of the black, and
Caesar was aware of the fact, by stealing a look through a passage under
one of his arms, that he had left expressly for the purpose of
reconnoitering. Captain Lawton would have discovered the fraud
immediately, but Mason was by no means so quick-sighted as his
commander. He therefore turned rather contemptuously to the soldier,
and, speaking in an undertone, observed,

"That anabaptist, methodistical, quaker, psalm-singing rascal has
frightened the boy, with his farrago about flames and brimstone. I'll
step in and cheer him with a little rational conversation."

"I have heard of fear making a man white," said the soldier, drawing
back, and staring as if his eyes would start from their sockets, "but it
has changed the royal captain to a black!"

The truth was, that Caesar, unable to hear what Mason uttered in a low
voice, and having every fear aroused in him by what had already passed,
incautiously removed the wig a little from one of his ears, in order to
hear the better, without in the least remembering that its color might
prove fatal to his disguise. The sentinel had kept his eyes fastened on
his prisoner, and noticed the action. The attention of Mason was
instantly drawn to the same object; and, forgetting all delicacy for a
brother officer in distress, or, in short, forgetting everything but the
censure that might alight on his corps, the lieutenant sprang forward
and seized the terrified African by the throat; for no sooner had Caesar
heard his color named, than he knew his discovery was certain; and at
the first sound of Mason's heavy boot on the floor, he arose from his
seat, and retreated precipitately to a corner of the room.

"Who are you?" cried Mason, dashing the head of the old man against the
angle of the wall at each interrogatory. "Who the devil are you, and
where is the Englishman? Speak, thou thundercloud! Answer me, you
jackdaw, or I'll hang you on the gallows of the spy!"

Caesar continued firm. Neither the threats nor the blows could extract
any reply, until the lieutenant, by a very natural transition in the
attack, sent his heavy boot forward in a direction that brought it in
direct contact with the most sensitive part of the negro--his shin. The
most obdurate heart could not have exacted further patience, and Caesar
instantly gave in. The first words he spoke were--

"Golly! massa, you t'ink I got no feelin'?"

"By heavens!" shouted the lieutenant, "it is the negro himself!
Scoundrel! where is your master, and who was the priest?" While
speaking, he made a movement as if about to renew the attack; but Caesar
cried aloud for mercy, promising to tell all that he knew.

"Who was the priest?" repeated the dragoon, drawing back his formidable
leg, and holding it in threatening suspense. "Harvey, Harvey!" cried
Caesar, dancing from one leg to the other, as he thought each member in
turn might be assailed.

"Harvey who, you black villain?" cried the impatient lieutenant, as he
executed a full measure of vengeance by letting his leg fly.

"Birch!" shrieked Caesar, falling on his knees, the tears rolling in
large drops over his shining face.

"Harvey Birch!" echoed the trooper, hurling the black from him, and
rushing from the room. "To arms! to arms! Fifty guineas for the life of
the peddler spy--give no quarter to either. Mount, mount! to arms!
to horse!"

During the uproar occasioned by the assembling of the dragoons, who all
rushed tumultuously to their horses, Caesar rose from the floor, where
he had been thrown by Mason, and began to examine into his injuries.
Happily for himself, he had alighted on his head, and consequently
sustained no material damage.




